gīrvāṇairarthyamāno daśamukhanidhanaṃ kosaleṣvṛśyaśṛṅge
putrīyāmiṣṭimiṣṭvā daduṣi daśarathakṣmābhṛte pāyasāgryam |
tadbhuktyā tatpurandhrīṣvapi tisṛṣu samaṃ jātagarbhāsu jāto
rāmastvaṃ lakṣmaṇena svayamatha bharatenāpi śatrughnanāmnā ||1||
gīrvāṇai:-arthyamāna:	by the Devas, (Thou) who were prayed to
daśamukha-nidhanaṃ	for the destruction of Raavana
kosaleṣu-ṛśyaśṛṅge	in (the land of) Kosala, (when) sage Rishyashring
putrīyām-iṣṭim-iṣṭvā	the Putrakaameshti Yanjya had performed
daduṣi daśaratha-kṣmābhṛte	(he) gave to king Dashratha
pāyasa-agryam	the divine Paayasa (pudding)
tat-bhuktyā	by eating which
tat-purandhrīṣu-api tisṛṣu	his three wives
samaṃ jātagarbhāsu	simultaneously conceived
jāta: rāma:-tvaṃ	(then) Thou were born as Raama
lakṣmaṇena svayam-atha	then yourself as Lakshmana
bharatena-api	also as Bharat
śatrughna-nāmnā	(and) Shatrughna, by names
The Devas prayed to Thee for the destruction of Raavana. In the kingdom of Kosala, the sage Rishyashringa performed the Putrakaameshti Ynjya on the request of the King Dashratha. From the Yanajya emerged the divine paayasa which the king distributed among his three wives, by eating it they conceived simultaneously. Thou were born to them as Raama, then yourself as Lakshmana ,also as Bharat, and Shatrughna, by these names.
kodaṇḍī kauśikasya kratuvaramavituṃ lakṣmaṇenānuyāto
yāto'bhūstātavācā munikathitamanudvandvaśāntādhvakheda: |
nṛṇāṃ trāṇāya bāṇairmunivacanabalāttāṭakāṃ pāṭayitvā
labdhvāsmādastrajālaṃ munivanamagamo deva siddhāśramākhyam ||2||
kodaṇḍī	carrying the bow Kodanda
kauśikasya kratuvaram-avituṃ	Vishwaamitra's great sacrifice to protect
lakṣmaṇena-anuyāta:	followed by Lakshmana
yāta:-abhū:-tāta-vācā	(Thou) proceeded at the bidding of (Thy) father
muni-kathita-manu-dvandva-	instructed by the muni, the two Mantras (Bala & Atibala)
śānta-adhva-kheda:	to remove the fatigue of the way
nṛṇāṃ trāṇāya bāṇai:-	for the protection of the people, with arrows
muni-vacana-balāt-	by the order of the muni
tāṭakāṃ pāṭayitvā	slayed Taatakaa
labdhvā-asmāt-	received from him (the sage)
astra-jālaṃ	instructions into the use of several divine missiles
muni-vanam-agama:	with the sage went to the forest
deva	Thou O Lord!
siddhāśrama-ākhyam	to the hermitage known as Sidhaashrama
At the bidding of Thy father, followed by Lakshmana, Thou proceeded to protect the great sacrifice of Vishwaamitra, carrying the bow Kodanda. To remove the fatigue of the way, the sage imparted two Mantraas -Bala and Atibala. By the order of the sage, for the relief of the men, Thou destroyed the demoness Taadakaa, with arrows. After receiving from the sage instructions in the use of several divine missiles, Thou went to the forest with the sage and then to the hermitage named Siddhaashrama.
mārīcaṃ drāvayitvā makhaśirasi śarairanyarakṣāṃsi nighnan
kalyāṃ kurvannahalyāṃ pathi padarajasā prāpya vaidehageham |
bhindānaścāndracūḍaṃ dhanuravanisutāmindirāmeva labdhvā
rājyaṃ prātiṣṭhathāstvaṃ tribhirapi ca samaṃ bhrātṛvīraissadārai: ||3||
mārīcaṃ drāvayitvā	chasing away Maareecha
makha-śirasi śarai:-	at the beginning of the sacrificial rites, by arrows
anya-rakṣāṃsi nighnan	killed the other Raakhsasa
kalyāṃ kurvan-ahalyāṃ	and purified Ahilyaa of her sins
pathi padarajasā	on the way by the dust of Thy feet
prāpya vaideha-geham	reaching Janaka's palace
bhindāna:-cāndracūḍaṃ dhanu:-	(and) breaking the bow of Shiva
avani-sutām-	the daughter of the Earth (Seetaa)
indirām-eva labdhvā	(Who) was Lakshmi herself having won
rājyaṃ prātiṣṭhathā:-tvaṃ	Thou set out for Thy kingdom
tribhi:-api ca samaṃ	along with the three
bhrātṛvīrai:-sadārai:	great brothers and their wives
At the beginning of the sacrificial rites, Thou chased Maareecha and with arrows killed the other Raakshasas. On the way Thou purified Ahilyaa of her sins by the dust of Thy feet. On reaching Janaka's palace and breaking the bow of Shiva, Thou won Seetaa, the daughter of the earth, as Thy consort, who was Lakshmi herself. Along with the three great brothers and their wives Thou set out for Thy kingdom.
ārundhāne ruṣāndhe bhṛgukula tilake saṃkramayya svatejo
yāte yāto'syayodhyāṃ sukhamiha nivasan kāntayā kāntamūrte |
śatrughnenaikadātho gatavati bharate mātulasyādhivāsaṃ
tātārabdho'bhiṣekastava kila vihata: kekayādhīśaputryā ||4||
ārundhāne ruṣāndhe	Thou were confronted, blinded by rage
bhṛgukula tilake	by the foremost of the Bhrigu clan, Parashuraama
saṃkramayya svateja: yāte	(in the end) transmitted all his powers to Thee and went away
yāta:-asi-ayodhyāṃ	Thou went to Ayodhyaa
sukham-iha nivasan kāntayā	where Thou lived happily with Thy wife Seetaa
kāntamūrte	O Radiant Lord!
śatrughnena-ekadā-atha:	then one day with Shatrughna
gatavati bharate	when Bharat had gone
mātulasya-adhivāsaṃ	to his uncle's kingdom
tāta-ārabdha:-	started by Thy father
abhiṣeka:-tava kila vihata:	Thy coronation was obstructed
kekaya-adhīśa-putryā	by the daughter of the king of Kekaya, (Kekayee)
O Radiant Lord! Parashuraama, the foremost of the Bhrigu clan, confronted Thee with great anger and was defeated. He then transmitted all his powers to Thee and went away. Thou went to Ayodhyaa and lived happily with Thy consort Seetaa. Then one day, when Bharat along with Shatrughna had gone to his uncle's kingdom,Thy father fixed Thy coronation which was obstructed by the daughter of the king Kekaya, i.e., Kekayee.
tātoktyā yātukāmo vanamanujavadhūsaṃyutaścāpadhāra:
paurānārudhya mārge guhanilayagatastvaṃ jaṭācīradhārī|
nāvā santīrya gaṅgāmadhipadavi punastaṃ bharadvājamārā-
nnatvā tadvākyahetoratisukhamavasaścitrakūṭe girīndre ||5||
tāta-uktyā	to keep Thy father's words
yātukāma: vanam-	desirous of going to the forest
anuja-vadhū-saṃyuta:-	accompanied by Thy younger brother and wife
cāpa-dhāra:	bearing a bow
paurān-ārudhya mārge	sending back the citizens on the way
guha-nilaya-gata:-tvaṃ	Thou went to the residence of Guha
jaṭā-cīra-dhārī	wearing matted hair and bark cloth
nāvā santīrya gaṅgām-	crossing the Gangaa in a boat
adhipadavi puna:-taṃ	on the way again, him
bharadvājam-ārāt-natvā	to Bharadwaaj who lived near by offered obeisance
tat-vākya-heto:-	by his instructions
ati-sukham-avasa:-	Thou lived very happily
citrakūṭe girīndre	on the great mountain Chitrakoot
To keep Thy father's words Thou proceeded to go to the forest accompanied by Thy consort Seetaa, and brother Lakshmana, armed with a bow. The crowd of citizens stricken with grief, who followed Thee, Thou sent back and on the way went to the residence of Guha. In an ascetic garb of bark cloth and matted hair Thou crossed the Gangaa in a boat and paid obeisance to sage Bharadwaaja who lived near by. On the sage's instruction Thou camped on the great mountain Chitrakoota and lived there very happily.
śrutvā putrārtikhinnaṃ khalu bharatamukhāt svargayātaṃ svatātaṃ
tapto datvā'mbu tasmai nidadhitha bharate pādukāṃ medinīṃ ca
atriṃ natvā'tha gatvā vanamativipulaṃ daṇḍakaṃ caṇḍakāyaṃ
hatvā daityaṃ virādhaṃ sugatimakalayaścāru bho: śārabhaṅgīm ||6||
śrutvā putra-ārti-khinnaṃ	on hearing (that) saddened by the pain (of separation)of the son
khalu bharata-mukhāt	indeed from Bharat's mouth
svarga-yātaṃ sva-tātaṃ	about the death of Thy father
tapta: datvā-ambu tasmai	tormented, (Thou) performed Tarpana for him
nidadhitha bharate	bestowed on Bharata
pādukāṃ medinīṃ ca	(Thy) sandals and the kingdom
atriṃ natvā-atha	paying homage to sage Atri, then
gatvā vanam-	went to the forest
ati-vipulaṃ daṇḍakaṃ	Dandaka which was very vast
caṇḍakāyaṃ	the ferocious bodied
hatvā daityaṃ virādhaṃ	Asura named Viraadha killing
sgatim-akalaya:-	salvation bestowed
cāru bho: śārabhaṅgīm	beautifully, O Thou! To (the sage) Shaarabhanga
Hearing from Bharat about Thy father's demise on account of the pangs of separation from the son (Thee), Thou were tormented and performed Tarpana for him. Then Thou bestowed Thy sandals and the kingdom to Bharata and paid homage to sage Atri. Going into the dense vast forest Dandaka, Thou killed the ferocious bodied demon Viraadha, and Thou graciously gave salvation to sage Shaarabhangee.
natvā'gastyaṃ samastāśaranikarasapatrākṛtiṃ tāpasebhya:
pratyaśrauṣī: priyaiṣī tadanu ca muninā vaiṣṇave divyacāpe |
brahmāstre cāpi datte pathi pitṛsuhṛdaṃ vīkṣya bhūyo jaṭāyuṃ
modāt godātaṭānte pariramasi purā pañcavaṭyāṃ vadhūṭyā ||7||
natvā-agastyaṃ	(after) paying obeisance to sage Agastya
samasta-āśara-nikara-sapatrākṛtiṃ	the whole demon multitude will be killed to the core
tāpasebhya: pratyaśrauṣī:	to the sages, promised
priyaiṣī tadanu ca	(Thou) the well wisher, and after that
muninā vaiṣṇave divya-cāpe	by the sage the divine Vaishnava bow
brahmāstre ca-api	and also the Brahmaastra
datte pathi	was given, on the way
pitṛ-suhṛdaṃ vīkṣya	seeing Thy father's friend
bhūya: jaṭāyuṃ modāt	again Jataayu happily
godā-taṭānte	on the banks of Godaavari river
pariramasi purā	Thou lived then
pañcavaṭyāṃ vadhūṭyā	in Panchvati with Thy consort
After paying obeisance to sage Agastya, Thou the well wisher of the sages, promised to destroy the multitude of demons to the core. Then the sage gave Thee the divine Vaishnava bow and also the Brahmaastra. Thou also met Thy father's friend Jataayu and lived happily with Thy consort Seetaa in Panchawati on the banks of the river Godaavaree.
prāptāyā: śūrpaṇakhyā madanacaladhṛterarthanairnissahātmā
tāṃ saumitrau visṛjya prabalatamaruṣā tena nirlūnanāsām |
dṛṣṭvaināṃ ruṣṭacittaṃ kharamabhipatitaṃ dūṣaṇaṃ ca trimūrdhaṃ
vyāhiṃsīrāśarānapyayutasamadhikāṃstatkṣaṇādakṣatoṣmā ||8||
prāptāyā: śūrpaṇakhyā	approached by Shoorpanakhaa
madana-cala-dhṛte:-	(who was) overcome by passion
arthanai:-nissahātmā	by (her) entreaties being annoyed
tāṃ saumitrau visṛjya	sending her away to Lakshmana
prabalatama-ruṣā tena	by whom in great rage
nirlūna-nāsām	(her) nose was cut off
dṛṣṭvā-aināṃ ruṣṭa-cittaṃ	seeing her (thus) in great anger
kharam-abhipatitaṃ	Khar attacked (Thee)
dūṣaṇaṃ ca trimūrdhaṃ	Dooshana and Trishiraa
vyāhiṃsī:-āśarān-api-	(Thou) destroyed (them) and other Raakshasas also
ayutasama-adhikān-	who were more than ten thousand
tat-kṣaṇāt-	then and there
akṣata-ūṣmā	Thou! Whose powers know no decline
Shoorpanakhaa approached Thee overcome with passion. Annoyed by her love lorn advances, Thou sent her away to Lakshmana who in great rage cut off her nose. Khar Dooshana and Trishira seeing her state came to attack Thee in great anger. O Thou! Whose powers know no decline, Thou killed them and other more than ten thousand Raakshasas all at once then and there.
sodaryāproktavārtāvivaśadaśamukhādiṣṭamārīcamāyā-
sāraṅga sārasākṣyā spṛhitamanugata: prāvadhīrbāṇaghātam |
tanmāyākrandaniryāpitabhavadanujāṃ rāvaṇastāmahārṣī-
ttenārto'pi tvamanta: kimapi mudamadhāstadvadhopāyalābhāt ||9||
sodaryā-prokta-vārtā-	by (his) sister (he was) told the account
vivaśa-daśamukha-	infatuated Raavana
ādiṣṭa-mārīca-	ordered Maareech
māyā-sāraṅga	(to become) the illusive dear
sārasākṣyā	by the lotus-eyed (Seetaa)
spṛhitam-anugata:	(it was) desired, (Thou) went after
prāvadhī:-bāṇa-ghātam	(and) killed with an arrow
tat-māyā-kranda-	by him an illusive cry
niryāpita-bhavat-anujāṃ	sent out by her (Seetaa) Thy younger brother
rāvaṇa:-tām-ahārṣīt-	Raaavana abducted her
tena-ārta:-api	because of that even though grieved
tvam-anta:	Thou inwardly
kim-api-mudam-adhā:-	were somewhat pleased
tat-vadha-upāya-lābhāt	for getting a reason for killing him
Raavana's sister Shurpanakhaa gave an account of Seetaa by which he was infatuated and ordered Maareech to become the illusive deer. The lotus eyed Seetaa, made a desire for the deer and Thou went after it and killed it with an arrow. As Maareech died, he gave an illusive cry imitating Raama. Hearing the cry , Seetaa sent away Thy younger brother Lakshmana after him. Finding her alone Raavana abducted Seetaa. Though Thou were grieved at this, Thou also felt some joy as this gave a good reason to kill Raavana.
bhūyastanvīṃ vicinvannahṛta daśamukhastvadvadhūṃ madvadhene-
tyuktvā yāte jaṭāyau divamatha suhṛda: prātano: pretakāryam |
gṛhṇānaṃ taṃ kabandhaṃ jaghanitha śabarīṃ prekṣya pampātaṭe tvaṃ
samprāpto vātasūnuṃ bhṛśamuditamanā: pāhi vātālayeśa ||10||
bhūya:-tanvīṃ vicinvan-	thereafter, searching for the beautiful one
ahṛta: daśamukha:-	Raavana abducted
tvat-vadhūṃ mat-vadhena-	Thy consort by killing me
iti-uktvā yāte jaṭāyau	saying thus (when) Jataayu went to
divam-atha suhṛda:	heaven, then of his friend (Jataayu)
prātano: pretakāryam	(Thou) performed funeral rites
gṛhṇānaṃ taṃ kabandhaṃ	who had caught hold of Thee that Kabandha
jaghanitha śabarīṃ prekṣya	(Thou) killed, bestowed salvation to Shabari
pampātaṭe tvaṃ samprāpta: vātasūnuṃ	on the banks of Pampaa getting to meet Hanumaan
bhṛśamuditamanā:	Thou were greatly delighted
pāhi vātālayeśa	protect O Lord of Guruvaayur!
While searching for Seetaa, the dying Jataayu informed Thee that Raavana had abducted Seetaa and also had inflicted fatal wounds on him, when offered resistance.Thou performed the funeral rites of this friend Jataayu. On the way the monster Kabandha obstructed Thee and was killed. Thou then gave salvation to the ascetic woman Shabari and also got to meet Hanumaana on the banks of the river Pampaa, to Thy great delight. O Lord of Guruvaayur! protect me.